---
title: "Why start a blog?"
author: "John Joseph Valletta"
excerpt: "Three reasons for starting this blog"
date: '25 June 2018'
tags: [blog, education]
categories: misc
author_profile: true
output: 
    html_document:
        fig_caption: yes
        theme: flatly
        highlight: pygments
        smart: TRUE
        toc: TRUE
        toc_depth: 3
        number_sections: TRUE
        toc_float:
            collapsed: TRUE
            smooth_scroll: FALSE
---


Almost, no one does anything for no reason. Here are my three reasons for starting this blog:

## 1. Enhance my own understanding of a topic

[Richard Feynman](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Feynman) was a theoretical physicist. 
Apart from his (many) scientific accomplishments, he was renowned for explaining complex 
scientific concepts in simple and easily-understood terms. His technique for learning 
new concepts can be summarised as follows (or watch this short [video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tkm0TNFzIeg))

a. Choose a topic you want to learn and study it

b. Write the concept down in layman's terms

c. Find the gaps in your knowledge, go back to the source material and restudy it
(repeat b. until you are happy with your understanding)

d. Simplify the language used and add an analogy where possible

I apply these rules whenever I'm preparing material for a workshop or seminar. 
It is surprising (perhaps it shouldn't be anymore) how often I have to go back
and restudy a topic which I thought I knew very well! Blogging is therefore another route
towards improving my understanding of several topics. Explaining something to others
require you to fully understand it yourself first!
    
## 2. Avoid repeating the same explanation/advice

[David Robinson](http://varianceexplained.org/r/start-blog/) summarises this very well in his tweet:

<blockquote class="twitter-tweet" data-lang="en"><p lang="en" dir="ltr">When you’ve written the same code 3 times, write a function<br><br>When you’ve given the same in-person advice 3 times, write a blog post</p>&mdash; David Robinson (@drob) <a href="https://twitter.com/drob/status/928447584712253440?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw">November 9, 2017</a></blockquote>
<script async src="https://platform.twitter.com/widgets.js" charset="utf-8"></script>

Blog posts acts as a repository of explanations/advice that can be quickly shared with many people.

## 3. (Try) and give something back to the community

I have used countless blogs to get me started; from using a new R package to basic DIY.
This is my attempt and giving something back to the community. I hope that
some of the things I will write about will be useful to some of you!
